Count corpus follow-up: 2026-10-09
================================

The migration's known-limits.json records e788d3d3, not the current solver.
Its 87 unresolved count models were tested through one CountLcg local allowance,
not through the whole integer-count portfolio. That allowance can end well before
the request's 20M work cap. Replaying the same entry at 9585a142 gives 194
conclusions and 80 unresolved cases out of 274, with no oracle disagreement.
Seven of the old unresolved cases already conclude before this change.

The historical entry remains the default. Explicit additional entries now compare
retained LCG, retained equivalent views, and the main integer-count stage. The last
entry embeds each finite model in recipes, invokes IntegerCountSearch, and checks
every positive result against the original bounds, rows and primitive plan prefix.
It is not the complete GraphPlanner, tree fallback, or runtime executor.

All comparisons below use 20,000,000 request work, no wall deadline, 256 MiB of
request reservations and one worker. No budget limit or multiplier was increased.

                         9585a142       This change
  Main count conclusions      229               236
  Main count unresolved        39                32
  Conversion unsupported        6                 6
  Wrong conclusions             0                 0
  Lost conclusions              -                 0

All six unsupported conversions have an unbounded variable. This finite recipe
embedding cannot represent them. They are neither solver failures nor UNSAT;
the raw LCG/view entries remain available. Of the 236 candidate conclusions, 220
are original-row-checked SAT witnesses and 16 agree with known UNSAT oracles.

What changed
------------
An exact-one group can choose one resource, with unit resource capacity expressed
only as pairwise conflicts. The earlier Hall relaxation greedily consumed these
pairs as separate resources, missing the complete conflict group and its capacity.
It could fail to prove even k groups competing for k-1 resources at the full cap.

CountHall now finds disjoint complete components of those pairwise conflicts.
Every endpoint must have the actual integer domain [0,1] and belong to different
exact-one groups. Every pair must exist. An independently checked CountProof.Clique
derives sum(x) <= 1; the ordinary Hall matching and row-sum proof then use it.
An incomplete component remains a relaxation; it never becomes a capacity merely
because it is connected. The serialized proof includes the pair and domain premises.

The ordinary root CountReduction requests this bounded capacity strengthening
before branching. It does not enable Hermite or repeat Hall at every child.
The existing 32,768 Hall allowance and admission bounds stay unchanged. Optional
adjacency and proof workspaces are reserved and released; stored cuts account for
their terms. Cut construction and independent verification are charged to the
request, with work left for the original matching certificate.

The k=4..13 clique-coloring family now all concludes UNSAT. Seven cases previously
ran out of 20M work; those now take 53,523..269,677 aggregate charged work. The
236 conclusions include those seven, with no conclusion regression in the corpus.
Raw work comparisons are not a wall-time speedup measurement: the runs overlapped
other regression processes and do not measure steady-state CPU or process RSS.

Regression evidence and reproduction
------------------------------------
HallCapacityTest checks 30 deficits, 30 feasible single-missing-edge neighbors and
240 independently enumerated finite models (122,880 assignments). It also verifies
all returned cuts from established original premises, serializes/reloads proof
archives, and interrupts adjacency/certificate work with cancellation or a shared
request cutoff. Partial work releases all reservations.

CapacityPipelineReview passes 30 main-count deficits and nine feasible neighbors
with row order, column order, term insertion order and signed domain offsets varied.
The finite embedding is tested to decline an unbounded domain explicitly.

At this boundary, all 49 standard programs passed. The 239 curated fixtures and
800 expanded weighted-choice fixtures each passed three catalog orders (3,117
original-arc validations). Full captured inventory with 5,903 manual and 62,284
exported recipes passed 96 requests. The four-worker campaigns passed nine base-
budget and nine expanded-budget requests. Offline assemble passed and its source
JAR was compared byte-for-byte to the tested production tree. Captured replay is
offline evidence, not a live-server test.

  python tests/run.py --java-home JDK17 --suite standard
  python tests/run.py --java-home JDK17 --suite models --model-engine main-counts
    --case clique-coloring --milliseconds 0 --work 20000000
  python tests/run.py --java-home JDK17 --suite models --model-engine main-counts
    --milliseconds 0 --work 20000000 --keep-going --model-trace

The full count command still exits 2: unresolved and unsupported cases remain.
Use --model-engine lcg-first, lcg-retained, or views to preserve the distinction
between the historical initial slice and later continuation. Exact model IDs,
expected truths, source/harness fingerprints and residual classifications live in
tests/provenance/count-replay-20261009.json; inputs remain in the existing corpus.

Still unresolved
----------------
The 32 main-count cases comprise 18 known SAT, two known UNSAT and 12 models whose
truth was not independently established in their source record. Most belong to
sparse/wide equalities, subset sums and the lseu bound family. UNKNOWN never changes
their expected truth or becomes an infeasibility proof.

Retaining LCG to the same full cap resolves nine of its 80 initial-slice failures;
71 remain unresolved. This measures only that selected group, not a retained replay
of every model already solved by the historical entry.

Two residuals expose a useful next comparison: original-coordinate views prove
stein27_inf in 13,116,328 work, and original LCG solves wide-equality-n64-w10000 in
6,505,335 (views: 8,168,409), while the embedded main-count portfolio reaches 20M
without a conclusion. These are equivalent feasibility problems, but embedding,
normalization, ordering and budget distribution differ. The observations alone do
not isolate scheduling as the cause or justify forcing a single arm for all models.

Historical probe assertions were not all rerun here. This count-stage evidence
also does not close the large-closure, numeric-continuation, attribution or live
integration gaps listed in audit-followup.txt.
