Fixed-work solver throughput
============================

This optimization changes arithmetic implementation, not search budgets,
operation weights, branching order or the treatment of UNKNOWN. It follows a
JDK Flight Recorder sample of the retained-prefix planning regressions, which
identified exact rational normalization and LCG propagation as CPU/allocation
hotspots. Profiling identifies candidates; serial warmed comparisons establish
whether they actually become faster.

LCG propagation
---------------
For a row sum(a_i*x_i) <= b, compute the residual b - minimum once at the frozen
trail prefix. With a finite endpoint, the implied bound is endpoint plus or
minus floor(residual / abs(a_i)). This avoids multiplying a potentially enormous
endpoint and subtracting it from the row activity for every literal. When the
entire current domain fits in the residual, the implied bound is already true:
skip the division and literal allocation while retaining its original scan
charge. A fixed domain is the zero-width case.

An infinite upper endpoint is handled separately; its residual may be negative.
The explanation slack remains abs(a_i)*(floor(residual/abs(a_i))+1)-residual-1,
which is exact for both signs. All implications still use the same frozen trail
prefix and are only applied after the row scan. Positive-denominator division
uses primitive floorDiv only when BOTH operands fit signed 64 bits, with an
exact BigInteger path outside that range. No fluid/count quantity is converted
through floating point.

Rational arithmetic
-------------------
Equal denominators need only one numerator addition and, for nonintegers, one
cancellation GCD. Adding an integer to a reduced fraction preserves coprimality.
Integer products and multiplication/division by one do not need normalization.
The general cross-cancelled path remains in place; dividing by a GCD of one
returns the existing immutable BigInteger. The original 2048-bit precision
limit is checked on every newly constructed result, including fast paths.

Correctness coverage
--------------------
ExactRationalRegressionTest uses an independent full-product fraction oracle,
including signed, overlapping/equal denominators, exact cancellation and the
precision boundary. CountLcgWatchTest checks exhaustive integer boxes and
independent proof replay. Its extra 192 variants exercise shifted domains around
Long.MIN_VALUE/Long.MAX_VALUE, coefficients through 1023 bits and models whose
upper caps must be inferred from rows. Retained states, learned reasons,
cancellation and memory cleanup remain covered by the existing suites.

Reproducible measurement
------------------------
Run these serially, without concurrent regression campaigns. Replace JDK17 with
the local JDK 17 directory. The baseline is the model-scope fix immediately before
these arithmetic changes; every script records source/harness identities.

  python tests/benchmarks/compare_throughput.py --java-home JDK17
    --baseline cae59245 --forks 3 --warmup 5 --samples 5 --cases 16
    --engines lcg-binary,lcg-finite,lcg-offset,lp-unit,lp-dense
    --output build/throughput-comparison

Five deterministic groups cover Boolean, finite-integer and >64-bit shifted LCG
domains, plus unit-coefficient and dense exact LPs. Models are constructed before
timing. Each JVM warms up first; baseline/candidate launch order alternates across
forks. Every measured case must retain the same work and full canonical witness
or unresolved result. Some bounded LCG attempts may remain UNKNOWN: throughput
does not turn them into infeasibility proofs or solved cases. ThreadMXBean
measures actual thread allocation, independently of logical memory reservations.
Validation and witness serialization are outside the timed/allocation interval.

The planning comparison can also warm up and repeat complete requests:

  python tests/benchmarks/compare_planning.py --java-home JDK17
    --baseline cae59245 --fixture-dir tests/regression/fixtures/retained-prefix
    --preserve-order --permutations 2 --warmup 2 --repetitions 3
    --work 20000000 --milliseconds 0 --memory-mib 256 --modes accounts
    --require-same-work --output build/throughput-planning

This includes cold, warm and replaced compiler states, final execution validation
and compilation/search cost accounts. --require-same-work rejects any paired
change to outcome or the work needed for the first/final witness. It is optional
for comparisons of algorithm changes that intentionally explore different states.

These are local JVM measurements, not claims about live server tick time or RSS.
Core/view regressions, shuffled planning fixtures, captured inventory/full-recipe
replay and four-worker budgets are separate correctness checks.

Recorded local comparison (2026-10-09)
-------------------------------------
JDK 17.0.19, 512 MiB benchmark heap, three independent JVM forks per revision,
five warmup and five measured rounds, 16 cases per specialist group. Ratios below
are candidate/baseline; below one is less time or fewer allocated bytes. Work and
the complete canonical witnesses/outcomes are identical in every measured case.

  Group             Time ratio    Allocation ratio    Outcome per 16 cases
  LCG Boolean          0.914              0.778          16 witnesses
  LCG finite           0.806              0.444           7 witnesses, 9 UNKNOWN
  LCG shifted          0.764              0.459           4 witnesses, 12 UNKNOWN
  LP unit              0.655              0.548          16 optimal
  LP dense             0.972              0.791          16 optimal

The small dense-LP timing difference should not be treated as a universal speedup.
The finite/shifted UNKNOWN entries are deliberately capped specialist attempts,
not whole-planner failures. No extra work allowance was supplied to either side.

The separate retained-prefix planning campaign ran five fixed hard models in
cold/warm/replaced states, with two warmups and three measured repetitions in
each of two JVMs per revision. Both revisions validated all 90 measured requests
with identical compilation/search and first-witness work. The median total time
per 15-request campaign was 9.365 s before and 8.803 s after (ratio 0.940).

Dense pivot and affine lattice reuse
-----------------------------------
The next comparison uses 390630fd as its baseline. Dense simplex updates contain
many expressions a*b/c with a varying across columns but b and c fixed for the
row. ProductQuotient prepares b/c once, retaining it across 256-cell handoffs.
The optional fraction has a 768-byte workspace reservation; declining it uses
the old arithmetic and does not reject an otherwise admissible tableau. The
factor is local to this tableau and is released on close, termination or basis
transfer. No cached factor travels to another model or a warm child tableau.

Changing arithmetic order must preserve the precision contract. A conservative
bit-length guard proves that the OLD intermediate a*b fits before using the
prepared factor. Otherwise the original multiply-then-divide order runs. If
b/c itself is too wide, preparation is discarded: it must not reject a valid
a*b/c whose multiplication cancels the large denominator. Work charges still
use the original operands, so this reuse does not buy a larger search allowance.

Affine lattice elimination computes the exact quotients a/gcd(a,b) and
b/gcd(a,b) once per column transformation. Gram-Schmidt reuses one immutable
source row instead of reconstructing the same integer fractions at every
projection. LLL and nearest-plane updates also reuse their fixed integer
multiplier. These are local arithmetic substitutions with unchanged equations,
rounding, search order, precision limits and work charges. The single temporary
row fits in the already reserved bounded lattice workspace.

ExactPivotTest independently enumerates vertices of 160 bounded planar LPs and
checks their primal, dual and negative certificates with full-product fractions.
It also exercises handoffs within 257-variable pivot rows, repeated hot children,
scratch admission/refusal, cancellation and the 1023/1024-bit precision boundary.
ExactRationalRegressionTest adds 1,203 prepared-factor contexts checked against
an independent multiply-then-divide oracle, including signed 2048-bit edges and
the two different intermediate-overflow cases. CountKernelTest independently
checks 480 signed/large-offset finite boxes and conditional proof conclusions.

The throughput harness now also includes 8- and 16-variable lattice models and
12-variable models with an 80-bit domain offset. Complete returned witnesses
are independently checked against the original domains and all rows. A bounded
lattice miss remains UNKNOWN; the strategy cannot prove these planted models
infeasible. Compare all eight groups with the same frozen harness:

  python tests/benchmarks/compare_throughput.py --java-home JDK17
    --baseline 390630fd --forks 3 --warmup 5 --samples 5 --cases 16
    --output build/pivot-throughput

Use the planning command above with --baseline 390630fd for the corresponding
complete-request comparison, still requiring identical first/final work.

Follow-up local measurements (same JDK and heap)
-----------------------------------------------
Three independent forks, five warmup and five measured rounds, 16 cases/group:

  Group             Time ratio    Allocation ratio    Outcome per 16 cases
  LCG Boolean          1.001              1.000          16 witnesses
  LCG finite           1.016              1.000           7 witnesses, 9 UNKNOWN
  LCG shifted          0.996              1.000           4 witnesses, 12 UNKNOWN
  LP unit              0.708              0.687          16 optimal
  LP dense             0.623              0.727          16 optimal

The unchanged LCG groups provide controls. The short mixed campaign's lattice
timings were unstable: the dense group's ratio was 1.565, with candidate fork
medians ranging from 61.9 to 114.9 ms. Do not use that campaign to claim a lattice
speedup. A separate, longer warmed comparison checks whether this persists:

  python tests/benchmarks/compare_throughput.py --java-home JDK17
    --baseline 390630fd --forks 3 --warmup 20 --samples 10 --cases 32
    --engines lattice,lattice-dense,lattice-offset
    --output build/pivot-lattice-warmed

  Group             Time ratio    Allocation ratio    Outcome per 32 cases
  Lattice              0.999              0.927          32 witnesses
  Lattice dense        0.982              0.945          31 witnesses, 1 UNKNOWN
  Lattice shifted      0.977              0.935          32 witnesses

These timings support a reduction in allocation, not a substantial lattice
speedup. The dense candidate fork medians in the longer comparison were
103.5/106.1/105.0 ms, versus 105.6/106.9/108.5 ms before. Each revision still
produced the identical complete witnesses, UNKNOWN cases and work per case.

The complete retained-prefix campaign validated 90 measured requests per
revision with identical first/final compilation and search work. Median time
per 15-request campaign was 8.285 s before and 8.194 s after (ratio 0.989).
Treat this as essentially unchanged overall planning time; the clear timing
gain in this batch is in the dense LP specialist, not a universal planner gain.

Final correctness checks passed 46 standard programs, 3,117 shuffled planning
cases, 96 captured-inventory/full-catalog requests, and nine four-worker requests
at each of the base and expanded work budgets. Assembly succeeded, and the
source JAR was checked byte-for-byte against the frozen tested production tree.
